---
title: The Future
permalink: essay/future.html
layout: about
---
## The Future

_By Michael Decker_

Beginning in the Frank Church Wilderness, Jack, Chris, and I have spent the last two weeks traveling across Idaho taking photos of fire lookouts and interviewing those who work on still active sites. We are beat up and tired, our skin is leathery, and our lips are cracking from the drastic shifts in elevation.

We, along with my girlfriend, Kourt, who has driven down to the Lochsa country of central Idaho to meet us, are hiking to Diablo Peak where Bill Moore spends two weeks a year as a lookout. Like Pam, Bill runs a volunteer program for lookouts that provides an additional level of fire reduction and helps keep the tradition of lookouts alive.

Bill Moore is the son of the late Lochsa district ranger and activist Bud Moore, who implemented a _multiple-use_ policy in the Selway-Bitterroot Wilderness. Multiple-use policy aims to manage competing needs and values to achieve ecosystem health alongside human society’s economic demands. Bud was one of the first lookouts in this part of the country, having spent several seasons on McConnell Mountain which is just over the ridge from Diablo. 

The story goes that Bud began his tenure with the Forest Service as a lookout and smoke chaser. He was stationed at McConnell Mountain in 1935 where he stayed for several years and immediately found a flaw in the Forest Service’s fire watching approach at McConnell Mountain: during lightning storms, he was confined to a cabin below the tree line which had been outfitted to withstand strikes. Out of rocks, Bud constructed a small tower higher up that had a cupola design and where he would watch for strikes during summer storms. From this vantage point, he made notations about strike locations and improved his overall accuracy and effectiveness as a fire lookout. When the district ranger came to check on Bud, he was impressed with his design and ordered a fire lookout be built in place of the rock pile. 

Bud left the Selway-Bitterroot to fight in World War II but returned and became district ranger in the early-1950s. During this time, McConnell was an active lookout that helped to reinforce the Forest Service’s infamous 10 a.m. policy. All fires, the Forest Service proclaimed, were to be exterminated by 10 a.m. the following morning. However, enabled by the signing of The Wilderness Act of 1964, the Selway-Bitterroot became protected Wilderness, which meant that a new set of fire policies were put in place from total fire suppression to wildfire as prescribed burn.

In a sense, Bud always recognized that some of his policies, retrospectively, were harmful. This includes spraying DDT to kill pine beetles and wood worms and starving soils of nitrogen and amassing fuel loads that feed anthropogenic forest fires to this day. Regardless, Bud often admitted these shortcomings and proposed different modeling for management that imagined more ideal environmental futures. For example, Bud led the reintroduction of controlled burns in fire deficit areas in the Selway-Bitterroot. Many of his thoughts and actions can be found in his sprawling book _The Lochsa Story: Land Ethics in the Bitterroot Mountains_. Tellingly, this book was written a full decade prior to its publication (1996) because many of the ideas within it were not yet popularly accepted, and, as Bill points out, he refused to vanity publish.

{% include feature/video.html objectid="diablo-mountain011" width="50" start="00:00:05" %}

“Bill!” I call out as the shape of Diablo’s lookout materializes through the ubiquitous wildfire smoke. I see a fluorescent work shirt make its way over a ridge and a pale hand wave howdy. Bill is a septuagenarian who moves slowly but confidently; it is the result of a life spent hiking and living in a big open country. He smiles an honest, crooked smile that, to me, is the stuff of life and makes me feel at home. He invites us up to the cabin and brews a pot of coffee that effortlessly creates hospitality, and which prompts conversation in the way only a pot of coffee shared among friends can.  

{% include feature/image.html objectid="diablo-mountain008" width="50" caption="Michael Decker and Bill Moore on Diablo Peak
Photo by Chris Lamb"%}

The tower is full of books (notably, Kresek's _Fire Lookouts of the Northwest_) and gear that lookouts have left over the years. The design of most towers is the same: a propane stove, small refrigerator, wooden framed bed, and shelving around the ceiling for holding canned goods and books. A map of the tower’s surrounding topography is attached to a wooden board that folds down from the ceiling above the bed, and that can be used in conjunction with the fire finder. Most of the tower’s belongings are somewhat antiquated; however, there are modern objects as well: a Garmin InReach on which I glanced a message asking Bill if he had been evacuated yet (as there are several fires burning near the tower), his iPhone that he uses to snap a portrait of our team, and a newer REI backpack near the bed. 

“Could you really quickly give us a three-sixty view here?” Chris begins the interview. Bill chuckles and points his finger to the east.

“I’m not sure how to put it. We’re sitting on the ridge between the Selway drainage and the Lochsa drainage. You got Big Fog lakes up here in the fog or the smoke. You can just see the tail end of it. It’s about a mile long and has a sand bar at one end. Wonderful fishing. You come up over this ridgetop here, that’s Genette Mountain. You go down into Little Moose Crick and that’s Dead Elk Point right there. There’s a little low one called Footstool.  Go down this way and that’s Goat Lakes. Behind them is Wahoo Point and Battle Creek Ridge. That is all in what used to be the Nez Perce National Forest. It’s now the Clearwater-Nez. Then you go around this corner where the smoke is really heavy and that's Elbow Bend. Between Elbow Bend and that corner is a huge old-growth cedar grove that was written up in the National Geographic in 1935. That ridge that’s coming down like that is Maple Ridge. There’s a little mountain range called the Graves Range, and right out there is Graves Peak.”

{% include feature/video.html objectid="diablo-mountain005" width="50" start="57" %}

As Bill describes the landscape, I imagine him oscillating his body from left to right, creating an arc of the horizon along an azimuth that traces a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree trajectory, and his tinted glasses all but revealing the squinting of one eye to identify the landmarks through an internalized parallax view. The other striking thing is that we cannot see any of these places that Bill talks about; the smoke is too thick for that. From the tower, the landscape appears as a white purgatory upon which nothing can be discerned; it is a _strange_ canvas which defamiliarizes the familiar. However, Bill is sure to point out that this smoke indicates something natural is occurring on the landscape, and that the high-visibility days of his and Bud’s early time as fire lookouts was the result of “Smokey the Bear'' or a euphemism for the Forest Service's 10 a.m. policy. 

We sit around for hours talking about Bill’s stories, and he goes into extensive detail about his father’s work in the district. He has interesting ways of pronouncing words; Diablo, for instance, is pronounced “die-ablo.” I also notice though that there is a childlike essence to Bill. Though time has aged him, I have no problem imagining him young, and when he talks about Bud, he always refers to him as “Pops.” Bill celebrates his father, but there is a pain in his voice. It is obvious how much he misses Bud who also represents a past way of life and attachment to the land. The act of maintaining lookout structures and lookout volunteer programs is an attempt, among other things, to keep this attachment alive. Storytellers like Bill, and the rest of us, really, see the world through an aggregation of experience. Places do not, to the human, exist in isolation of memory, and perhaps except for the Nez Perce who were born from this land, Bill and Bud are as infused with the landscape as anyone. 

In _The Lochsa Story_, Bud tells the story of himself as a young trapper on his first solo trip into the Bitterroots. Near a small lake in the Valley of the Brushy Fork, Bud comes face-to-face with a large grizzly bear, a species that was already on its way out of the area. Frozen with fear each stare into the face of the other and the human and bear come to an understanding as Bud says, that “[t]he forests belonged to the bear, but the meadow was mine; so I camped at its edge beneath thick-limbed spruces that would shield my blanket from the frost.” This confrontation becomes central to the land ethics that Bud presents in his book, and how he frames multiple-use theory as a viable management path forward; the idea that he and the Grizzly can come to an agreement to live out their distinct, but still intertwined, existences becomes, like democracy, a challenging idealization that is critical for the survival of both human and bear. 

Some say that the fire lookout gives those who can stay on them a _long view_, not just in-terms of a twenty-five-mile radius around the tower, but a view that looks deep into the past and future; and like the tower’s view, Bud believed that the remnants of his encounter with the bear–“[his] boot prints mingled with the grizzly tracks on the trail”—say something about where it is we have come from, and where it is we are going, like the light of a distant star glimpsed from a lookout during the night, at once happening and already having happened. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="spot-mountain008" width="50" %}

The futurist approach has been the most effective for wilderness preservation. Prior to Jimmy Carter signing the Alaska National Interests Land Act, he stated in 1978 that “We have the imagination and the will as a people to both develop our last great natural frontier and also preserve its priceless beauty for our children and grandchildren.” This same rhetoric of conservation on behalf of future generations has permeated the conversation of most environmental issues today including that of global climate change. As Roderick Nash compares “Modern civilization, it is said, needs wilderness, and if wilderness is to exist it surely needs the protection of a self-restraining society.” 

The Wilderness Act of 1964 is arguably the most profound and radical environmentalist action ever taken at the federal level. Its rigidity and ambiguity are its strength. Quoted more than any other section though is its stance on human remainder and that we are excluded from permanent placement within the wilderness. Yet, this is untrue. There is archaeological evidence that humans have moved across The Church for thousands of years. Everywhere you go, there is evidence of humans in the wilderness. 

This is what Cronon asserted was the danger of official wilderness boundaries: that they would separate our everyday lives from the conservation mindset of wilderness. Humans, he worried, would begin to justify more localized forms of environmental neglect if they could imagine untouched nature _elsewhere_.

Environmental and queer activist, and Idaho's first openly gay member of congress, Nicole Lefavour, staffed fire lookouts for several years, and describes in her essay “Listening to Voices in the Wilderness” that, “The decades of lookout use show on the tree stumps and snags below. Every year we have to walk farther for the wood, the skeleton of another ancient limber pine turned to a streak of wood smoke stretches across the sky.” LeFavour shows that remaining in such a way makes one more in tune with resource use. She continues to wonder that “somewhere far away men and women in the depths of marble buildings debate our need for wilderness.” LeFavour is concerned with location and how these politicians make high-stakes decisions outside of proximity to nature.

Lookouts have a long history of producing not only lifelong lovers of the wilderness, but some of its most effective protectors. Ray Kresek, for instance, says that he started his forestry career on a lookout and made the decision to end it there as well; in between, he  established the Salmo-Priest Wilderness. However, the Forest Service announced in 2023 during a Senate Budget Committee hearing that they intend to further reduce staffed lookouts. Lookouts, <a href="https://appropriations.house.gov/legislation/hearings/budget-hearing-fiscal-year-2024-request-united-states-forest-service">according to National Budgets Director, Mark Lichtenstein</a>, will be replaced by sophisticated smoke watching cameras that are <a href="[https://keeping.onrender.com/items/mcconnel-mountain001.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/08/24/us/wildfires-ai-detection-california.html)" target="_blank">augmented using artificial intelligence</a>. To what extent fire lookouts will remain is uncertain, but the direction is clear; and as we outmode our reliance on human experience, I wonder how we will remain.

{% include feature/video.html objectid="cold-mountain-lookout005" width="50" start="00:00:10" %}

My coffee has slowly emptied and now all that is left is the black residue of coffee grounds at the bottom. We start packing up our cameras and prepare to head back down the trail. The smoke, I think, has gotten worse since we arrived. Before we leave, Bill asks to take a picture of our team. We throw our arms over each other’s shoulders and pose in front of the white backdrop. 

As we get ready to leave, Bill gestures vaguely out toward McConnell Mountain where his dad had worked. In the end, lightning escaped from the sky and ignited a wildfire five miles from Bud’s old rock pile and three days later the now-decommissioned McConnell Mountain fire lookout burned down. <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/mcconnel-mountain001.html" target="_blank">Bill once wrote</a> that Bud, who passed away in 2010, would not be sad because “the story is a lesson about the circle of life and death in the Wilderness world.” 

Bud’s land ethic stated that no human alteration to the land, in his experience, is ever without consequences. Any changes to an ecosystem will always have unforeseen and unintended consequences. Making good management decisions requires living and working in a single place for a lifetime rather than for short durations. “Nature’s ways” Bud claims “have to be respected if we are to prosper very long.” And these ways, he emphasizes, are intricate and need both human emotions and applied science to become defensible.

After we leave, Bill will still be here. I think that being here does matter. Despite cost, efficiency, or current politics, the very act of remaining in one place and becoming familiar with its personality is as important as ever. I pause for a moment and fill my nose with the smokey air. The wind blows across my cheek. I think of it fanning the flames of the nearby Lolo Complex Fires. Ground squirrels chatter in nearby rocks. I look out at the smoke where the sky was, and I think that, if I could, I would lay down right here in the bear grass and never leave.

