---
title: Present Day
permalink: essay/present.html
layout: about
---
## Present Day

_By Michael Decker_

In the Department of Lands office in Nordman, Idaho, Pam, who runs a volunteer fire lookout program for the Priest Lake fire district in northern Idaho, tosses me a forest green shirt with “fire” printed in large white letters on the front. I met Pam two weeks ago at Sundance Lookout in the Selkirk Mountains. My colleagues, <a href="https://bonnercountydailybee.com/news/2021/may/18/digital-archive-documents-caribou-extirpation-nort/" target="_blank">Jack Kredell and Chris Lamb</a>, and I had recently interviewed her for Keeping Watch, an archive of interviews with current and former fire lookouts. 

{% include feature/video.html objectid="sundance-mountain006" width="50" start="00:00:06" %}

A week ago, Pam called me because an unexpected opening had become available on the tower and she wanted to offer me and my dog, Trout, the chance to work for a few days as a lookout. She thought it would be a good opportunity for someone studying lookouts to be one. I jumped at the opportunity, as it would be useful for the project because of this tower’s unique history: Sundance Lookout was the site of a lightning strike that ignited the <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/rm/pubs_int/int_rp056.pdf" target="_blank">1967 Sundance Fire</a> and burned fifty-thousand acres and killed two firefighters. The fire was exceptional by mid-twentieth century standards because it made an anomalous run of sixteen miles in just nine hours. It was the focus of numerous studies on unpredictable fire behavior thereafter, although burns of such severity and unpredictability have become common as unprecedented fuel loads are ignited by the burgeoning effects of climate change. These days, many wildfires are as severe as the Sundance Fire.

This increase in wildfire is exacerbated by the continued settlement of areas inside the _wildland urban interface_ or WUE: an area where developing human settlement meets what the U.S. Fire Administration calls “unoccupied land.” These homes are, unsurprisingly, at a higher risk of being destroyed by wildfire, which prompts complex fire reduction efforts by both private and government agencies. More specifically, in _Fire: A Brief History_, fire historian Stephen Pyne defines the WUE, and those who live on it, as "...still urban sprawl, even when populated by people who want woody jungles for privacy and naturalness." The WUE, as experts like Pyne are quick to point out, is a space where the needs of human and non-human worlds often clash. 

The growing wealth inequality along the wildland urban interface also explains the frustrations many Idahoans have with richer and often part-time residents with second homes in the state who typically receive more firefighting resources, often bankrolled by insurance companies trying to protect expensive assets. These new residents have begun constructing their dream homes, and in the Priest Lake fire district most of these homes are built near the lake shore with large adjacent swaths of _unoccupied_ land. Many fire lookouts, like Sundance, are either placed on or near the wildland urban interface or overlooking valuable stands of timber. 

Fire’s direct correlation to human migration coupled with economic and environmental factors, our team thinks, make fire lookouts an ideal location to study changing human perceptions of space and place, and to think about how these perceptions shape our material reality. There is also a rich history of forest management in the American West that can be documented, not to mention the individual stories about the people who _tried_ to leave society behind and live at the edge of human civilization on the interface of occupied and unoccupied land. We are most interested though in the relationship between fire lookouts and wilderness, both its past and future.

The fire lookout was born out of the creation of the Forest Service and the philosophy of managing forests, sustainably, for their use as resources (one of which has become recreation). Its founder, Gifford Pinchot, was a European educated forester who believed in economic principles of land conservation and sustainable development. In partnership with Teddy Roosevelt, Pinchot established the Forest Service in 1905.

Spurred by lookouts in Europe, Asia, and most recently in primitive fashions by private lumber companies, the Forest Service began outfitting and utilizing lookouts during the early-twentieth century. Initially, the Forest Service was met with opposition from private landowners and enterprising individuals because they felt that the agency would inhibit the free, and largely unregulated, market of logging. 

During the summer of 1910, however, a series of wildfires in Idaho and Montana converged into one giant blaze that was roughly 260 miles long and 200 miles wide. Three-million acres were burned, and eighty-five individuals burned to death. Numerous acts of heroism and a swift response by the Forest Service bolstered public support for the nascent agency. Emboldened by a changing public perception and the need for more effective fire monitoring networks, the Forest Service began building an unprecedented number of fire lookouts over the next twenty years.

During WWII though, significant fire labor was lost due to war time demands. Additionally, when the war ended, much of the technology, including aerial capabilities, began to be used for fire detection purposes. The 1940’s marked the beginning of the technological obsolescence of fire towers. 

Today, fire lookouts are placed intentionally on an interface separating land classifications and are overseen by different agencies, businesses, and individuals. They are also decommissioned on this same principle; those found in the center of what has now been set aside as official wilderness, and is thus not managed as rigorously for fire, are often no longer operational. Unless lookouts have special cultural or personal significance, they are often left to decompose back into the earth. Most lookouts that utilize staff and are fully operational for firefighting purposes are commonly in strategic locations to observe fire strictly for the purpose of making sure it does not cross the wilderness boundary. Examples of this are: <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/st-maries-peak.html" target="_blank">St. Mary's Peak</a> near Lolo and Stevensville, <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/sundance-mountain.html" target="_blank">Sundance Mountain</a> near the towns of Collin and Nordman as well as significant recreational activity, and <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/roughneck-peak.html" target="_blank">Ruffneck Peak</a> nearby the Stanley Basin. 

Another _economic_ dimension many lookouts have is their relationship to wilderness, particularly at the aesthetic level. Some lookouts built in scenic locations on top of craggy mountains are now managed by the Forest Service as <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/recarea/mbs/recreation/recarea/?recid=17850" target="_blank">backpacking shelters</a> or even <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/r1/recreation/?cid=fsp5_030855" target="_blank">rentals</a>. In Idaho, which has more designated wilderness than any other state and, by no coincidence, more fire lookouts, you will find abandoned cabins that freckle the interior of its wildlands. 

On private property, some landowners have even relocated fire lookouts and now service them as <a href="https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/25687274?source_impression_id=p3_1701638521_DPwVvIkSm3ws4mWi" target="_blank">AirBnB rentals</a>. This shift in purpose reveals a changing relationship to wilderness over the last century; lookouts were first built not as conduits of a wilderness aesthetic but rather as extensions of logging and mining in the early twentieth century.  

{% include feature/image.html objectid="associated-media002" width="50" %} 

Pam’s boss, John, slides a map across the table. It shows the topography surrounding Priest Lake and how the Selkirk Mountains make a skinny valley that crosses the Canadian border. Lightning bolts show where several strikes occurred a week ago during a June thunderstorm. These strikes are concerning because Idaho is in the early stages of its worst drought in several decades. I will be on the tower during what is projected to be the <a href="https://www.climatehubs.usda.gov/hubs/northwest/topic/2021-northwest-heat-dome-causes-impacts-and-future-outlook" target="_blank">hottest recorded temperatures ever in the Northwest</a>: one-hundred-and-thirteen degrees Fahrenheit, tomorrow. 

Pam and John tell me to watch for sleeper fires at these strike locations. _Sleepers_ are burns that do not immediately consume large amounts of fuel, but instead sit dormant and produce periodic smoke events before erupting into a larger fire, sometimes up to two weeks after initial ignition.

I shake their hands and thank Pam for the opportunity. She is smiling and adjusts her baseball cap covering a tuft of white hair and tells me to have fun and to drink alcohol in moderation because of the altitude. The Idaho Department of Lands has given me a truck to use. Even though my Subaru has all-wheel-drive, its four-cylinder engine is underpowered for the slope up to the tower, and its clearance is questionable. I open the door of the truck as Trout jumps up on the seat. I drive away from the government building with the AC blasting. Around 9 a.m., the temperature is approaching ninety degrees Fahrenheit.

On the road to Sundance, I look at my Idaho Department of Lands shirt, the government truck, and a black highway leading me like a river to a tower high in the Selkirk Mountains. The truck kicks up dust, and I climb the poorly maintained service road; the all-terrain tires tested by sharp rocks while the undercarriage passes narrowly over deep ruts and boulders. I forget to shift into four-wheel drive and, briefly, the truck’s tires spin free on the steep slope. Trout sits up abruptly and observes the situation. _Don’t worry, Bud._

The burn scar is the first thing I notice when cresting the peak of Sundance Mountain and despite vegetation from over half of a century of regeneration, its appearance is noticeably stunted compared to nearby mountain slopes. The heat is thick like syrup as I close the truck door and wave to the lookout being relieved from duty. Her two dogs run to the edge of the fifty-foot-tall tower. Trout looks at them uninterested. There is no barking. The other lookout waves back.

Inside the tower I inspect my new home which has a dish sink, propane stove, and a small refrigerator in the corner. Gas lamps hang on the wall above a small bed that I throw my sleeping bag over. I step onto the deck and see smoke obfuscating mountains to the east and north of me. With aerial surveillance taking place, I question how much of my antiquated role is necessary. I crack a beer and drag my camp chair to the deck. Trout sits next to me.

In the center of the tower is a podium on which sits a large steel table holding the Osborne Fire Finder. Lookouts use this device to precisely locate fires. It has a three-hundred-and-sixty-degree alidade surrounding a map with the fire tower at its center. The Osborne is used to call in the location of a smoke using degrees and minutes that are communicated to a fire dispatcher over the two-way radio system installed below the podium. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="sundance-mountain004" width="50" %}

The Osborne Fire Finder was primarily manufactured between the years 1920 and 1935 by Leopold and Stevens, a telescope manufacturing company, which thereafter also produced replacement parts until 1975, halting production because new fire detection methods had more or less made the fire finder obsolete. After a substantial increase in wildfires in the late-90s and early-00s, the federal government contracted with a new manufacturer, San Dimas and Technology Center, to resupply fire lookouts with Osbornes and to produce replacement parts as needed.

Why have federal and state governments and timber protection agencies (the latter usually funded by private logging companies) kept the human-staffed fire lookout around? I can think of many reasons why we _should_ have them. For instance, shouldn’t we be physically present in the places we are managing rather than making decisions from a God’s-eye view? Even in wild places, should this human element be removed? I use “wild” according to the wording of the Wilderness Act of 1964 which defines wilderness as "a place where man himself is but a visitor who does not remain." 

Yet it is precisely because the fire lookout allows us to remain in wilderness so effectively that they have not disappeared entirely. The phenomenological relationship to place remains valuable not only to individuals for personal reasons, but also to agencies like the Forest Service or Idaho Department of Lands. It would be incorrect to analyze the modern fire lookout without acknowledging the very real service it still provides. 

Lookout staff not only locate and call in new fires, they also monitor existing ones in real time and communicate with on-the-ground fire crews. Heat mapping can provide information about fire spread and size, and sophisticated weather modeling can determine precipitation levels, wind speed, and heat index; however, attentive fire lookouts _experience_ these factors, simultaneously, while searching for anomalies in the landscape. Technology has augmented, even reduced, the role of the human fire lookout, but it cannot entirely replace it.

{% include feature/video.html objectid="spot-mountain005" width="50" start="00:00:05" %} 

Through the window, a breeze sneaks in. It is about 15 degrees cooler on the tower than in the valley. The bear grass makes the air smell sweet, and the last patches of snow are melting at a perceptible rate. There is a pine snag on a nearby ridge to my southeast standing in an otherwise healthy forest, and below it the highwater mark of evening inches closer. I fixate on the steadiness of this pull between night and day. The sun’s geometry positions the tree at the fulcrum of light and dark. I glance at my phone: 7:38 p.m.

The sun dips behind the mountains. The evening neon radiates through bars of smoke rising above the Selkirks and a stratum of cosmic ozone and geology slowly dims into the night sky. Venus appears to my West. The universe flickers on. The Milky Way swirls like a parking lot oil stain as I lie in bed reading William Least Heat-Moon’s _Blue Highways._

{% include feature/image.html objectid="sundance-mountain002" width="50" %} 

_Blue Highways’_ premise is that a young Heat-Moon has lost his English lectureship, and his marriage is dissolving. Devastated, he sets out on a circular journey—like the Uroboros—that travels from New England and through the southwestern United States, into the Pacific Northwest, and veers east again. The only discernible destination is where he began. The trip is taken in a green Astrovan that he names Ghost Dancing after the Native American ritual which foretold the return of departed spirits and the end of colonial expansion.

Making his way through the American Southwest, Heat-Moon reflects on the smells and nuances of the central Nevada desert. Its lonesomeness makes him consider the Latin root of the English word _vacation_, which is _vacare_ (meaning “to be empty”). He uses the open space to infuse himself with impressions of the landscape and foster a connection to the non-interior world. To see himself out there in the desert and merge with the interstitial absence of the Nevada landscape and finally to be “absorbed” by it.     

Heat-Moon looks out of Ghost Dancing and sees himself reflected in the pellucidity of the van window, transposed onto the desert. Quoting Whitman, he describes “…the thoughtful merge of myself, and the outlet….” Seeing yourself as connected to and part of the exterior world is a common first step toward an ethics that accounts for the interconnected nature of the world and cosmos. Lookouts seem to facilitate this swiveling between _self_ and the _more-than-self_ because of their innate architecture. They provide easy access between the inside and outside world, and the panoramic windows allow one to glean their place in the larger landscape even while protected from the elements. 

I put down _Blue Highways_ and turn off my headlamp, get out of my sleeping bag, and walk to the window. Trout briefly lifts his head but falls back asleep. Between the inside of the cabin and the night sky, the windows and propane lamp transpose my face onto the universe. I walk to the deck and suddenly all that remains is black plasma where my face was.

