{% include feature/image.html objectid="/objects/firetower-as-letter.png" width="50"%}


Wildfire’s increase is exacerbated by the continued settlement of areas inside the _wildland urban interface_ or WUE: an area where developing human settlement meets what the U.S. Fire Administration calls “unoccupied land.” These homes are, unsurprisingly, at a higher risk of being destroyed by wildfire, which prompts complex fire reduction efforts by both private and government agencies. More specifically, in _Fire: A Brief History_, fire historian Stephen Pyne defines the WUE, and those who live on it, as “…still urban sprawl, even when populated by people who want woody jungles for privacy and naturalness.” The WUE, as experts like Pyne are quick to point out, is a space where the needs of human and non-human worlds often clash.

A growing wealth inequality along the wildland urban interface  also contributes to Idahoans' frustrations many long-time Idahoans have toward wealthier part-time residents with second homes. The newcomers dream homes typically receive more firefighting resources, often bankrolled by insurance companies trying to protect expensive assets; in the Priest Lake fire district, most of these homes are built where the lake shore meets large adjacent swaths of _unoccupied_ land. Lookouts—like Sundance—are either placed on or near the wildland urban interface or overlooking valuable stands of timber.

Fire Lookouts were created by the Forest Service in the 1910s under its early philosophy of sustainable forest management. At the time, this meant managing timber products, although it has since expanded to include recreation. When Gifford Pinchot—along with Teddy Roosevelt—founded the Forest Service in 1905, he championed economic principles of land conservation and sustainable development. 

Inspired by lookouts in Europe, Asia, and more recently by private lumber companies, the Forest Service began outfitting and utilizing lookouts during the early-twentieth century. Initially, the Forest Service was met with opposition from private landowners and capitalists because they felt that the agency would inhibit the free and largely unregulated market of logging. During the summer of 1910, however, a series of wildfires in Idaho and Montana converged into one giant blaze that was roughly 260 miles long and 200 miles wide. Three-million acres burned, and eighty-five people died. Numerous acts of heroism and a swift response by the Forest Service bolstered public support for the nascent agency. 

Emboldened by a changing public perception and the need for more effective fire monitoring networks, the Forest Service began building thousands of fire lookouts over the next twenty years. After WWII, military technology, including aerial capabilities, was repurposed for fire detection purposes. The 1940’s marked the beginning of the technological obsolescence of fire lookouts.

Today, fire lookouts are placed intentionally on an interface separating land classifications and are overseen by different agencies, businesses, and individuals. They are also decommissioned on this same principle; lookouts found in the center of what is now federally designated wilderness, and thus not managed as rigorously for fire, are often no longer operated and unless they have special cultural or personal significance, they are often left to decompose back into the earth. 

The lookouts that are staffed and operational for firefighting purposes are commonly in strategic locations to observe fire strictly for the purpose of making sure it does not cross the wilderness boundary. Examples of this are: <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/st-maries-peak.html" target="_blank">St. Mary's Peak</a> near Lolo and Stevensville, <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/sundance-mountain.html" target="_blank">Sundance Mountain</a> near the towns of Collin and Nordman as well as significant recreational activity, and <a href="https://keeping.onrender.com/items/roughneck-peak.html" target="_blank">Ruffneck Peak</a> nearby the Stanley Basin.

Not all non-operational lookouts are abandoned, however. Some lookouts built in scenic locations on top of craggy mountains are now managed by the Forest Service as <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/recarea/mbs/recreation/recarea/?recid=17850" target="_blank">backpacking shelters</a> or even <a href="https://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/r1/recreation/?cid=fsp5_030855" target="_blank">rentals</a>. In Idaho, which has more designated wilderness than any other state and, by no coincidence, more fire lookouts, abandoned cabins freckle the interior of its wildlands.

And on private property, some landowners have relocated fire lookouts and now list them as <a href="https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/25687274?source_impression_id=p3_1701638521_DPwVvIkSm3ws4mWi" target="_blank">AirBnB rentals</a>. This shift in purpose reveals a changing relationship to wilderness over the last century; lookouts were first built not as conduits of a wilderness aesthetic but rather as extensions of logging and mining in the early twentieth century. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="associated-media002" width="50" %} 

