{% include feature/image.html objectid="/objects/firetower-as-letter.png" width="25"%}

The word “wilderness” is deceptively unstable. It is a noun that functions like an adjective. Older mentions of wilderness often referred to something’s wilderness quality or used the indefinite article like in “a bog” or “a city.” It is only very recently that we have “The Frank Church Wilderness.” Thus, it is important to think of wilderness not only as a setting but also as a construct. As postmodern historian William Cronon asserts in his essay [“The Trouble with Wilderness”](https://www.williamcronon.net/writing/Trouble_with_Wilderness_Main.html) (1996), “Far from being the one place on earth that stands apart from humanity … [wilderness] is quite profoundly a human creation – indeed the creation of very particular human cultures at very particular moments in human history.”

The relationship of the fire lookout (both human and structure) to wilderness seems obvious. They do, after all, oversee such areas, or are at least adjacently located to them. However, it is only by elucidating wilderness both as place and concept that this relationship is fully understood. Wilderness boundaries established through legislation are fixed, whereas the concept of wilderness is not.

Far from the modern perception of wilderness, early American colonizers brought with them the European fear and hatred of wilderness which they believed impeded human progress. Tellingly, Andrew Jackson said in his 1830 inaugural address that “what good man would prefer a country covered with forests and ranged by a few thousand savages to our extensive Republic, studded with cities, towns, and prosperous farms, embellished with the improvements which art can devise or industry execute.” However, Roderick Nash points out in his tome Wilderness and the American Mind (1965) “modern man [felt] as insecure and confused in urban settings as he once felt in the forests among the wild beasts…” by the end of the century.

Further, Americans began ascribing the same aesthetic value to wilderness as to the Jacksonian art and industry. Bob Marshall, founder of The Wilderness Society, in his 1930 essay [“The Problem of the Wilderness”](https://www.umt.edu/media/wilderness/toolboxes/documents/awareness/Bob%20Marshall%20writing%20-%20The%20Problem%20of%20the%20Wilderness.pdf) (a similar title to Cronon’s “The Trouble with Wilderness”) says “One looks from outside at works of art and architecture, listens from outside to music or poetry. But when one looks at and listens to the wilderness, he is encompassed by his experience of beauty, lives in the midst of the esthetic universe.” By the inception of fire lookouts, there was a full-blown battle over the meaning of wilderness in both thought and in practice.

Two wings of environmental thought were crystalizing in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that still frame the contemporary wilderness paradigm. Conservationists (championing sustainable forest use for economic purposes) and preservationists (preaching wilderness non-interventionism) split from one another around the time that lookouts were first utilized to protect forest “crops.” The Forest Service, aided by the New Deal’s Civilian Conservation Corps, built thousands of fire lookouts, including Chicken Peak (1930) and Sheepeater Mountain Lookout (1934). The sole purpose for these lookouts was negating the wilderness condition through systematic fire suppression. The preservationists, led by John Muir, Aldo Leopold, and Howard Zahniser, fought legal battles over the preservation of Yosemite’s Hetch Hetchy Valley, Dinosaur National Monument, and the Grand Canyon, which led to the ratification of The Wilderness Act in 1964.

The creation of wilderness areas such as The Church directly correlates with the decline of fire lookouts. After all, there is no reason for a human made structure in what is legally defined as a place “where man himself is a visitor who does not remain.” However, fire lookouts sometime in the middle of the twentieth century become endowed with a similar scarcity as wilderness, and a different, less utilitarian gaze begins to be cast from them. As Aldo Leopold said of wilderness, “only when the end of the thing is in sight do we discover that the thing is valuable.”

Writers like Gary Snyder, Jack Kerouac, Edward Abbey, and Phillip Whalen staffed lookouts in the 1950s and 60s. Gary Snyder, rather than describing the official management purposes of lookouts, “[sits] cross-legged, in the practical and traditional posture of a Buddhist meditation.” Jack Kerouac, too, not encountering wildfire per se, came “face to face with [himself].” 

By the 1980’s it was clear that the real cultural significance of lookouts rested not in their utilitarian purpose, but rather in their connection to human wilderness: an artificial landscape at the nexus of the material world and spirituality that has emerged in reaction to rampant techno-industrialism. In Ray Kresek’s 1987 lookout “bible”, _Fire Lookouts of the Northwest_, he asks “Where have all the lookouts gone?” Rather than evoking nostalgia for antiquated management practices, Kresek outlines the troubles one returns to in civilization: “his buddy had run his car into a tree, his family was sore because he didn’t write all summer, and his girlfriend was going steady with someone else.” Instead, the lookout wishes to “return to his summer job in the wilderness atop Mount Sentinel … only to be told that his lookout was no longer there. They burned it down last fall.”

Most often, lookout life embodied not the clear segregation of wilderness or civilization, but rather the blending of the two. For instance, in “The Lookout”, Doug Peacock pours a bottle of 1970 Les Forts while listening to a Bach Cello solo “[feeling] like Captain Nemo in my mountain top glass house” as a violent thunderstorm passes over. Suddenly, someone radios him to confirm his official pack-out date. He then tries to regain his “sense of solitude.” 

Sheepeater Lookout is the last remaining staffed lookout in The Church, and recently only for emergency purposes. As we climb the Mosquito Ridge trail, the outline of Sheepeater Peak briefly comes into view. Last month, we interviewed a lookout enthusiast named Richard Holm who also restores lookouts in his spare time. In his 2009 book, _Points of Prominence_, Holm explains that Sheepeater exists at the edge of lookout evolution, and that those who staff it are primarily “fire monitors” who make sure that fire does not cross the wilderness boundary. Their new (and decreased) function is of interest to Holm, though, who points out that the average fire size has grown from just a few thousand acres to “100,000 acre fires [becoming] common place.” Such an increase is evidence that the same human conditions exacerbating fire in National Forests, TPA lands, private property, and National Parks, are present in wilderness areas as well.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="associated-media001" width="100" %}