{% include feature/image.html objectid="/objects/firetower-as-letter.png" width="50"%}

In _Lochsa Story_, Bud tells the story of himself as a young trapper on his first solo trip into the Bitterroots. Near a small lake in the Valley of the Brushy Fork, Bud comes face-to-face with a large grizzly bear, a species that was already on its way out of the area. Frozen with fear each stare into the face of the other and the human and bear come to an understanding as Bud says, that “The forests belonged to the bear, but the meadow was mine; so I camped at its edge beneath thick-limbed spruces that would shield my blanket from the frost.” This encounter becomes central to the land ethics that Bud presents in his book, and how he frames multiple-use theory as a viable management path forward; the idea that he and the Grizzly agree to live out their distinct yet still intertwined existences becomes a challenging idealization that is critical for the survival of both human and bear. 

Some say that fire lookouts give those who stay on them a _long view_, not just in-terms of the twenty-five-mile radius around the tower, but a view that looks deep into the past and future; and like the tower’s view, Bud believed that the remnants of his encounter with the bear–“[his] boot prints mingled with the grizzly tracks on the trail”—said something about where it is we come from, and where it is we are going, like the light of a distant star glimpsed from a lookout during the night, at once happening and already having happened. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="spot-mountain004" width="100" %}

The futurist approach has been the most effective for wilderness preservation. For instance, prior to signing the Alaska National Interests Land Act in 1978, Jimmy Carter stated that “We have the imagination and the will as a people to both develop our last great natural frontier and also preserve its priceless beauty for our children and grandchildren.” This same rhetoric of conservation on behalf of future generations has permeated the conversation of most environmental issues today, including that of global climate change. As Roderick Nash compares “Modern civilization, it is said, needs wilderness, and if wilderness is to exist it surely needs the protection of a self-restraining society.”

The Wilderness Act of 1964 is arguably the most radical environmentalist action ever taken at the federal level. Quoted more than any other section though is its stance on permanent human settlement, which states that “man himself is a visitor who does not remain” in the wilderness. Yet, this is untrue. There is archaeological and anecdotal evidence that humans have moved across The Church and Selway-Bitterroot for thousands of years. Everywhere, there is proof of humans in the wilderness.

This ecological amnesia is what Cronon asserted was the danger of official wilderness boundaries: that they would separate our everyday lives from the conservation mindset of wilderness. Humans, and specifically settler-colonial societies, he worried, would continue to justify more localized forms of environmental neglect if they could imagine untouched nature _elsewhere_.

Environmental and queer activist, Nicole Lefavour, staffed fire lookouts for several years, and in her essay “Listening to Voices in the Wilderness” describes how, “decades of lookout use show on the tree stumps and snags below. Every year we have to walk farther for the wood, the skeleton of another ancient limber pine turned to a streak of wood smoke stretches across the sky.” LeFavour shows that remaining in such a way makes one more in tune with resource use. She continues to wonder that “somewhere far away men and women in the depths of marble buildings debate our need for wilderness.” LeFavour is concerned with location and how politicians make high-stakes decisions while remaining disconnected from wild places.

Lookout structures have a long history of producing lifelong lovers of the wilderness and some of its most passionate protectors. Ray Kresek, for instance, says that he started his forestry career on a lookout and made the decision to end it there as well; in between, he established the Salmo-Priest Wilderness. However, the Forest Service announced in 2023 during a Senate Budget Committee hearing that they intend to further reduce staffed lookouts. Lookouts, <a href="https://appropriations.house.gov/legislation/hearings/budget-hearing-fiscal-year-2024-request-united-states-forest-service">according to National Budgets Director, Mark Lichtenstein</a>, will be replaced by sophisticated smoke watching cameras that are <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2023/08/24/us/wildfires-ai-detection-california.html" target="_blank">augmented using artificial intelligence</a>. To what extent fire lookouts will remain is uncertain, but the direction is clear; and as we reduce our reliance on human experience, I wonder how it is _we_ will remain.

