"I've been to a lot of lookouts, but I'm kind of like you guys: I've collected stories, not so much my own." The word "collected" can be taken literally as we are sitting in the former Cold Mountain Lookout cabin, now located in Richard's front yard. It is part of a massive collection of Idaho lookout artifacts that he has gathering for years. The three of us interviewing Richard are, in fact, like him; as literature and philosophy scholars, we often live vicariously through the experiences and ideas of others, and this project, it seems, is attempting to overcome such vicariousness. Already, the surreality of standing in this tower which has been taken physically from its original context-- in order to be preserved-- already feels like a story our team is making. This project is an experience we will talk about, perhaps, while being interviewed by a younger generation asking us what it was like to preserve the history of fire towers before they were gone. 

{% include feature/video.html objectid="cold-mountain-lookout001" width="50"%}


Richard talks in an encycopedic way about the specific towers he has been to, why they were built the way they were, why they were eventually taken down, and why some have endured in the late-twentieth and early-twenty-first centuries. What has kept people interested in them? Partially, we think, it has to do with their aesthetic charm, and, certainly, something about their mountain top locations. It is also likely something with the way the lookout and its remote location can dislocate one from the ordinariness of their lives. This is evident in the dislocated setting of the former Cold Mountain Lookout.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="cold-mountain-lookout003;cold-mountain-lookout004" %}

In the end of "The Trouble with Wilderness", William Cronon says, "[honoring the wild] means looking at the part of nature we intend to turn toward our own ends and asking whether we can use it again and again and again--sustainably--without its being diminished in the process. [...] Most of all, it means practicing rememberance and gratitude, for thanksgiving is the simplest and most basic of ways for us to recollect the nature, the culture, and the history that have come together to make the world as we know it." (90) Richard Holm talks at length about the human and natural history of Idaho. He is an expert recollector, a master of remembering.</p>